utils/haddock/CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

# Contributing to Haddock

Thank you for contributing to Haddock! Here is the information you will need in
order to make your contribution

## Reporting issues

Please open a ticket if you get an unexpected behaviour from Haddock!  
You should ideally include a [Short, Self Contained, Correct (Compilable), Example][SSCCE]
in your ticket, so that the maintainers may easily reproduce your issue.

Here is a list of things you should include in your ticket

* Your GHC version.

* Your platform, OS and distribution if applicable.

* Your cabal version if applicable.

* Include any other info you think might be relevant (sandbox? unusual setup?).

### Building the binary

Please visit https://ghc.dev to build a stage1 compiler.
Then, run the following command from the top-level:

```
$ ./hadrian/build -j --flavour=Quick --freeze1 _build/stage1/bin/haddock
```

### Running the test suites

Currently, this cannot be done with hadrian but has to be done with a
`cabal-install` built from `master`.

```
cabal test -w <absolute-path-to-ghc-repo>/_build/stage1/bin/ghc
```

For more details, see https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/issues/24976.

## Working with the codebase

The project provides a Makefile with rules to accompany you during development:

* `make style` runs the code formatter. You need `fourmolu` 0.15.0.0 and `cabal-fmt` 0.1.12 installed.
* `make tags` run the generation of etags/ctags, to enable you to browse to definitions without HLS. You need `ghc-tags` 1.8 installed.


[SSCCE]: http://sscce.org/

Commit message:

haddock: Restructure import statements
This commit removes idiosyncrasies that have accumulated with the years
in how import statements were laid out, and defines clear but simple
guidelines in the CONTRIBUTING.md file.

utils/haddock/CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

# Contributing to Haddock

Thank you for contributing to Haddock! Here is the information you will need in
order to make your contribution

## Reporting issues

Please open a ticket if you get an unexpected behaviour from Haddock!
You should ideally include a [Short, Self Contained, Correct (Compilable), Example][SSCCE]
in your ticket, so that the maintainers may easily reproduce your issue.

Here is a list of things you should include in your ticket

* Your GHC version.

* Your platform, OS and distribution if applicable.

* Your cabal version if applicable.

* Include any other info you think might be relevant (sandbox? unusual setup?).

### Building the binary

Please visit https://ghc.dev to build a stage1 compiler.
Then, run the following command from the top-level:

```
$ ./hadrian/build -j --flavour=Quick --freeze1 _build/stage1/bin/haddock
```

### Running the test suites

Currently, this cannot be done with hadrian but has to be done with a
`cabal-install` built from `master`.

```
cabal test -w <absolute-path-to-ghc-repo>/_build/stage1/bin/ghc
```

In order to make the process less burdensome, you can write the path in a cabal.project.local file.

For more details, see https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/issues/24976.

## Working with the codebase

The project provides a Makefile with rules to accompany you during development:

* `make style` runs the code formatter. You need `fourmolu` 0.15.0.0 and `cabal-fmt` 0.1.12 installed.
* `make tags` run the generation of etags/ctags, to enable you to browse to definitions without HLS. You need `ghc-tags` 1.8 installed.

We classify import statements in two blocks:

* Top block is for non-Haddock imports (`base`, `ghc`, `containers`, etc)
* Bottom block is for Haddock imports

[SSCCE]: http://sscce.org/
