.. _release-10-0-1:

Version 10.0.1
==============

The significant changes to the various parts of the compiler are listed in the
following sections. See the `migration guide
<https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/wikis/migration/10.0>`_ on the GHC Wiki
for specific guidance on migrating programs to this release.

Language
~~~~~~~~

- Fix a bug introduced in GHC 9.10 where GHC would erroneously accept infix uses
  of promoted data constructors without enabling :extension:`DataKinds`. As a
  result, you may need to enable :extension:`DataKinds` in code that did not
  previously require it.

- ``Type`` and ``Constraint`` are now (at last) completely distinct types, just as much
  as ``Int`` and ``Bool``.  For example, you can now
  write::

    type family F a

    type instance F Type = Int
    type instance F Constraint = Bool

  which was previously rejected with "Conflicting family instance declarations".

- The extension :extension:`ExplicitNamespaces` now allows namespace-specified
  wildcards ``type ..`` and ``data ..`` in import and export lists.

- Implicit parameters and ``ImpredicativeTypes``.  GHC now knows
  that if ``?foo::S`` is coecible to ``?foo::T`` only if ``S`` is coercible to ``T``.
  Example (from :ghc-ticket:`#26737`)::

    {-# LANGUAGE ImplicitParams, ImpredicativeTypes #-}
    newtype N = MkN Int
    test :: ((?foo::N) => Bool) -> ((?foo::Int) => Bool)
    test = coerce

  This is achieved by arranging that ``?foo :: T`` has a representational
  role for ``T``.

- Implement ``-XQualifiedStrings`` (`proposal <https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/blob/master/proposals/0723-qualified-strings.rst>`_)

- The experimental :extension:`Modifiers` extension now allows ``%foo`` syntax
  to attach types to various places in the syntax tree.

- Some previously-valid uses of :extension:`LinearTypes` are now rejected, since
  its syntax has been generalized for use with :extension:`Modifiers`. In
  particular, some kind annotations must be added::

    f :: Int %m -> Int -- no longer accepted
    f :: forall (m :: Multiplicity). Int %m -> Int -- still accepted

  Alternatively, most previously-valid code can still be accepted by setting
  ``-XLinearTypes -XNoModifiers``. But this doesn't reliably work with
  ``-XStrict``, and sometimes parentheses must be added::

    let %1 x:xs = ... in ... -- previously accepted with -XLinearTypes -XStrict
    let %1 (x:xs) = ... in ... -- still accepeted

    let %1 Just x = ... in ... -- previously accepted with -XLinearTypes -XStrict
    let %1 (Just x) = ... in ... -- still accepeted

  ``-XLinearTypes -XNoModifiers`` doesn't accept the old versions, because
  modifiers now bind tighter than constructors. The first now parses as
  ``let (%1 x):xs = ... in ...``, and the second no longer parses at all.

Compiler
~~~~~~~~

- Code coverage's (:ghc-flag:`-fhpc`) treatment of record fields now extends
  beyond record fields accessed via :extension:`RecordWildCards` and
  :extension:`NamedFieldPuns`, and also handles access to nested record fields.
  That is, in a pattern such as ``Foo{bar = Bar{baz = b}}`` both ``bar`` and
  ``baz`` will now be marked as covered if ``b`` is evaluated. Note that this
  currently only works when record fields (or values contained within them) are
  bound to variables. The very similar pattern ``Foo{bar = Bar{baz = 42}}``
  will will not yet mark ``bar`` or ``baz`` as covered.

- Pattern synonyms can now be suggested as valid hole fits (except, of course,
  if they are unidirectional).

- GHC uses the information from the definition of a *closed* type family to
  generate some extra functional dependencies for type equalities involving
  that type family. As a consequence:

  * typechecking will succeed a bit more often (see :ghc-ticket:`23162`)
  * pattern-match incompleteness checking is a bit smarter, giving fewer false warnings (see :ghc-ticket:`#22652`)

- When multiple ``-msse*`` flags are given, the maximum version takes effect.
  For example, ``-msse4.2 -msse2`` is now equivalent to ``-msse4.2``.
  Previously, only the last flag took effect.

- Some x86 architecture flags now imply other flags.
  For example, :ghc-flag:`-mavx` now implies :ghc-flag:`-msse4.2`,
  and :ghc-flag:`-mavx512f` now implies :ghc-flag:`-mfma`
  in addition to :ghc-flag:`-mavx2`.
  Refer to the users' guide for more details about each individual flag.

- The flag ``-fhide-source-paths`` is enabled by default at verbosity level 1 and below by default.
  This improves the readability of the compiler output, as we transition from:

.. code-block:: text

    [  1 of 139] Compiling Distribution.Compat.Binary ( src/Distribution/Compat/Binary.hs, /home/tchoutri/Code/cabal/dist-newstyle/build/x86_64-linux/ghc-9.12.2/Cabal-syntax-3.17.0.0/build/Distribution/Compat/Binary.o, /home/tchoutri/Code/cabal/dist-newstyle/build/x86_64-linux/ghc-9.12.2/Cabal-syntax-3.17.0.0/build/Distribution/Compat/Binary.dyn_o )
    [  2 of 139] Compiling Distribution.Compat.Exception ( src/Distribution/Compat/Exception.hs, /home/tchoutri/Code/cabal/dist-newstyle/build/x86_64-linux/ghc-9.12.2/Cabal-syntax-3.17.0.0/build/Distribution/Compat/Exception.o, /home/tchoutri/Code/cabal/dist-newstyle/build/x86_64-linux/ghc-9.12.2/Cabal-syntax-3.17.0.0/build/Distribution/Compat/Exception.dyn_o )
    [  3 of 139] Compiling Distribution.Compat.Newtype ( src/Distribution/Compat/Newtype.hs, /home/tchoutri/Code/cabal/dist-newstyle/build/x86_64-linux/ghc-9.12.2/Cabal-syntax-3.17.0.0/build/Distribution/Compat/Newtype.o, /home/tchoutri/Code/cabal/dist-newstyle/build/x86_64-linux/ghc-9.12.2/Cabal-syntax-3.17.0.0/build/Distribution/Compat/Newtype.dyn_o )
    [  4 of 139] Compiling Distribution.Compat.Semigroup ( src/Distribution/Compat/Semigroup.hs, /home/tchoutri/Code/cabal/dist-newstyle/build/x86_64-linux/ghc-9.12.2/Cabal-syntax-3.17.0.0/build/Distribution/Compat/Semigroup.o, /home/tchoutri/Code/cabal/dist-newstyle/build/x86_64-linux/ghc-9.12.2/Cabal-syntax-3.17.0.0/build/Distribution/Compat/Semigroup.dyn_o )
    [  5 of 139] Compiling Distribution.PackageDescription.Utils ( src/Distribution/PackageDescription/Utils.hs, /home/tchoutri/Code/cabal/dist-newstyle/build/x86_64-linux/ghc-9.12.2/Cabal-syntax-3.17.0.0/build/Distribution/PackageDescription/Utils.o, /home/tchoutri/Code/cabal/dist-newstyle/build/x86_64-linux/ghc-9.12.2/Cabal-syntax-3.17.0.0/build/Distribution/PackageDescription/Utils.dyn_o )
    [  6 of 139] Compiling Distribution.Utils.Base62 ( src/Distribution/Utils/Base62.hs, /home/tchoutri/Code/cabal/dist-newstyle/build/x86_64-linux/ghc-9.12.2/Cabal-syntax-3.17.0.0/build/Distribution/Utils/Base62.o, /home/tchoutri/Code/cabal/dist-newstyle/build/x86_64-linux/ghc-9.12.2/Cabal-syntax-3.17.0.0/build/Distribution/Utils/Base62.dyn_o )
    [  7 of 139] Compiling Distribution.Utils.MD5 ( src/Distribution/Utils/MD5.hs, /home/tchoutri/Code/cabal/dist-newstyle/build/x86_64-linux/ghc-9.12.2/Cabal-syntax-3.17.0.0/build/Distribution/Utils/MD5.o, /home/tchoutri/Code/cabal/dist-newstyle/build/x86_64-linux/ghc-9.12.2/Cabal-syntax-3.17.0.0/build/Distribution/Utils/MD5.dyn_o )

to

.. code-block:: text

    [  1 of 139] Compiling Distribution.Compat.Binary
    [  2 of 139] Compiling Distribution.Compat.Exception
    [  3 of 139] Compiling Distribution.Compat.Newtype
    [  4 of 139] Compiling Distribution.Compat.Semigroup
    [  5 of 139] Compiling Distribution.PackageDescription.Utils
    [  6 of 139] Compiling Distribution.Utils.Base62
    [  7 of 139] Compiling Distribution.Utils.MD5

See :ghc-ticket:`25345`.

- Add several options for x86 extensions: :ghc-flag:`-mavx512bw`,
  :ghc-flag:`-mavx512dq`, :ghc-flag:`-mavx512vl`, and :ghc-flag:`-mgfni`.

- Improved treatment of floating-point in constant folding. GHC will now
  preserve the sign of zero and NaN payloads during constant folding,
  fixing :ghc-ticket:`9811` and :ghc-ticket:`21227`.

  As a side effect, ``x + 0`` will no longer be constant-folded to ``x``, because
  ``-0 + 0 = 0``, where ``-0`` is the IEEE-754 negative zero floating point
  constant. Instead, it is ``x + -0`` that is constant-folded to ``x``.

- SIMD support has been added to the AArch64 Native Code Generator.
  Currently, 128-bit wide vectors are supported via ASIMD (also known as NEON).

GHCi
~~~~

- Added the :ghci-cmd:`:version` command. This displays the current GHC version.

Runtime system
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Add a new `poll` I/O manager, based on the classic unix `poll()` API. It is
  available in the single-threaded RTS on posix platforms. The `select` I/O
  manager remains the default for this combination for now, but this default
  may change in future releases. The new I/O manager can be selected via the
  runtime flag :rts-flag:`--io-manager=(name)`.

  Compared to the `select` I/O manager, this one has slightly less severe
  restrictions on the number of sockets/pipes that can be waited on, though
  it still scales poorly for waiting on socket/pipe readiness. It does however
  scale much better for thread timers (such as `threadDelay`), and improves
  timer precision on 32bit Linux and 32bit FreeBSD from milliseconds to
  microseconds.

  This I/O manager introduces new infrastructure for I/O managers that is
  intended to be used in future for a new generation of in-RTS I/O managers,
  using more scalable platform-specific APIs (such as epoll, io_uring and
  kqueue). This first one, based on `poll()`, is merely intended to be
  portable.


Cmm
~~~

``base`` library
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Updated to `Unicode 17.0.0
  <https://www.unicode.org/versions/Unicode17.0.0>`_.

``ghc-prim`` library
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``ghc`` library
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``ghc-heap`` library
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``ghc-experimental`` library
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- New SIMD primops for bitwise logical operations on 128-wide vectors.

``template-haskell`` library
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- We have added the ``addDependentDirectory`` function to match
  ``addDependentFile``, which adds a directory to the list of dependencies that
  the recompilation checker will look at to determine if a module needs to be
  recompiled.

Included libraries
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The package database provided with this distribution also contains a number of
packages other than GHC itself. See the changelogs provided with these packages
for further change information.

.. ghc-package-list::

    libraries/array/array.cabal:                         Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/base/base.cabal:                           Core library
    libraries/binary/binary.cabal:                       Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/bytestring/bytestring.cabal:               Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/Cabal/Cabal/Cabal.cabal:                   Dependency of ``ghc-pkg`` utility
    libraries/Cabal/Cabal-syntax/Cabal-syntax.cabal:     Dependency of ``ghc-pkg`` utility
    libraries/containers/containers/containers.cabal:    Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/deepseq/deepseq.cabal:                     Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/directory/directory.cabal:                 Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/exceptions/exceptions.cabal:               Dependency of ``ghc`` and ``haskeline`` library
    libraries/filepath/filepath.cabal:                   Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    compiler/ghc.cabal:                                  The compiler itself
    libraries/ghci/ghci.cabal:                           The REPL interface
    libraries/ghc-boot/ghc-boot.cabal:                   Internal compiler library
    libraries/ghc-boot-th/ghc-boot-th.cabal:             Internal compiler library
    libraries/ghc-compact/ghc-compact.cabal:             Core library
    libraries/ghc-heap/ghc-heap.cabal:                   GHC heap-walking library
    libraries/ghc-prim/ghc-prim.cabal:                   Core library
    utils/haddock/haddock-api/haddock-api.cabal:         Dependency of ``haddock`` executable
    utils/haddock/haddock-library/haddock-library.cabal: Dependency of ``haddock`` executable
    libraries/haskeline/haskeline.cabal:                 Dependency of ``ghci`` executable
    libraries/hpc/hpc.cabal:                             Dependency of ``hpc`` executable
    libraries/integer-gmp/integer-gmp.cabal:             Core library
    libraries/mtl/mtl.cabal:                             Dependency of ``Cabal`` library
    libraries/parsec/parsec.cabal:                       Dependency of ``Cabal`` library
    libraries/pretty/pretty.cabal:                       Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/process/process.cabal:                     Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/stm/stm.cabal:                             Dependency of ``haskeline`` library
    libraries/template-haskell/template-haskell.cabal:   Core library
    libraries/terminfo/terminfo.cabal:                   Dependency of ``haskeline`` library
    libraries/text/text.cabal:                           Dependency of ``Cabal`` library
    libraries/time/time.cabal:                           Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/transformers/transformers.cabal:           Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/unix/unix.cabal:                           Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/Win32/Win32.cabal:                         Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/xhtml/xhtml.cabal:                         Dependency of ``haddock`` executable
    libraries/os-string/os-string.cabal:                 Dependency of ``filepath`` library
    libraries/file-io/file-io.cabal:                     Dependency of ``directory`` library
