.. _release-8-8-4:

Release notes for version 8.8.4
===============================

GHC 8.8.4 is a minor release intended to fix regressions and minor bugs in the
8.8.1, 8.8.2 and 8.8.3 releases.

Like previous releases in the 8.8 series, the :ghc-flag:`LLVM backend <-fllvm>`
of this release is to be used with LLVM 7.

Highlights
----------

- Fixes a bug in process creation on Windows (:ghc-ticket:`17926`).

- Works around a Linux kernel bug in the implementation of ``timerfd``\s (:ghc-ticket:`18033`).

- Fixes a few linking issues affecting ARM

- Fixes "missing interface file" error triggered by some uses of ``Ordering`` (:ghc-ticket:`18185`)

- Fixes an integer overflow in the compact-normal-form import implementation (:ghc-ticket:`16992`)

- ``configure`` now accepts  ``--enable-numa`` flag to enable/disable ``numactl`` support on Linux.

- Fixes potentially lost sharing due to the desugaring of left operator sections (:ghc-ticket:`18151`).

- Fixes a build-system bug resulting in potential miscompilation by unregisteised compilers (:ghc-ticket:`18024`)

Known issues
------------

- A long-standing bug (:ghc-ticket:`16893`) which can cause some applications
  of ``unsafeCoerce`` to segmentation fault is only partially fixed in this
  release. This release only avoids this issue in the uses of ``unsafeCoerce``
  in ``Data.Typeable.Internal``, which was the proximate cause of
  :ghc-ticket:`16893`.

  However, it is possible that this bug could manifest in user-code using
  ``unsafeCoerce`` to perform dynamic type checks. See the :ghc-ticket:`ticket
  <16893>` for details.

- The simplifier can optimise away some applications of the ``touch#`` primop
  when it can prove that the ``touch#`` is unreachable due to divergence or
  synchronous exception, resulting in memory unsoundness. Users requiring
  ``touch#`` behavior are advised to only use ``touch#`` to implement
  continuation-passing-style primitives (e.g. in the style of
  ``withForeignPtr``) bearing ``NOINLINE`` pragmas (to avoid inappropriate
  simplification). See :ghc-ticket:`17760` for details.

Included libraries
------------------

The package database provided with this distribution also contains a number of
packages other than GHC itself. See the changelogs provided with these packages
for further change information.

.. ghc-package-list::

    libraries/array/array.cabal:             Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/base/base.cabal:               Core library
    libraries/binary/binary.cabal:           Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/bytestring/bytestring.cabal:   Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/Cabal/Cabal/Cabal.cabal:       Dependency of ``ghc-pkg`` utility
    libraries/containers/containers/containers.cabal:   Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/deepseq/deepseq.cabal:         Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/directory/directory.cabal:     Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/filepath/filepath.cabal:       Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    compiler/ghc.cabal:                      The compiler itself
    libraries/ghci/ghci.cabal:               The REPL interface
    libraries/ghc-boot/ghc-boot.cabal:       Internal compiler library
    libraries/ghc-boot-th/ghc-boot-th.cabal: Internal compiler library
    libraries/ghc-compact/ghc-compact.cabal: Core library
    libraries/ghc-heap/ghc-heap.cabal:       GHC heap-walking library
    libraries/ghc-prim/ghc-prim.cabal:       Core library
    libraries/haskeline/haskeline.cabal:     Dependency of ``ghci`` executable
    libraries/hpc/hpc.cabal:                 Dependency of ``hpc`` executable
    libraries/integer-gmp/integer-gmp.cabal: Core library
    libraries/libiserv/libiserv.cabal:       Internal compiler library
    libraries/mtl/mtl.cabal:                 Dependency of ``Cabal`` library
    libraries/parsec/parsec.cabal:           Dependency of ``Cabal`` library
    libraries/process/process.cabal:         Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/pretty/pretty.cabal:           Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/stm/stm.cabal:                 Dependency of ``haskeline`` library
    libraries/template-haskell/template-haskell.cabal:     Core library
    libraries/terminfo/terminfo.cabal:       Dependency of ``haskeline`` library
    libraries/text/text.cabal:               Dependency of ``Cabal`` library
    libraries/time/time.cabal:               Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/transformers/transformers.cabal: Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/unix/unix.cabal:               Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/Win32/Win32.cabal:             Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/xhtml/xhtml.cabal:             Dependency of ``haddock`` executable

