docs/users_guide/9.14.1-notes.rst, before:

.. _release-9-14-1:

Version 9.14.1
==============

The significant changes to the various parts of the compiler are listed in the
following sections. See the `migration guide
<https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/wikis/migration/9.14>`_ on the GHC Wiki
for specific guidance on migrating programs to this release.

Language
~~~~~~~~

* ``-Wincomplete-record-selectors`` is now part of `-Wall`, as specified
  by `GHC Proposal 516: add warning for incomplete record selectors <https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/blob/master/proposals/0516-incomplete-record-selectors.rst>`_.
  Hence, if a library is compiled with ``-Werror``, compilation may now fail. Solution: fix the library.
  Workaround: add ``-Werror=no-incomplete-record-selectors``.

  Note that this warning is at least
  as serious as a warning about missing patterns from a function definition, perhaps even
  more so, since it is invisible in the source program.

* The combination of :extension:`ScopedTypeVariables` and :extension:`TypeApplications`
  no longer enables type applications in patterns, which now always requires
  :extension:`TypeAbstractions`. The warning flag``deprecated-type-abstractions``
  has also been removed from the compiler.

* :extension:`OverloadedRecordUpdate` now passes the arguments to a ``setField`` function
  in the flipped order, as specified by `GHC Proposal 583: HasField redesign <https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/blob/master/proposals/0583-hasfield-redesign.rst>`_.

  Previously GHC expected ``setField`` to have this type: ::

    setField :: forall (fld :: Symbol) a r. r -> a -> r

  And that's what GHC expects now: ::

    setField :: forall (fld :: Symbol) a r. a -> r -> r

  That will break the combination of :extension:`OverloadedRecordUpdate` with :extension:`RebindableSyntax`.

Compiler
~~~~~~~~

- An improved error message is introduced to refer users to the heap-controlling flags of the RTS when there is a heap overflow during compilation. (#25198)

GHCi
~~~~

- :ghci-cmd:`:info` now outputs type declarations with @-binders that are
  considered semantically significant. See the documentation for :ghci-cmd:`:info`
  itself for a more detailed explanation.

Runtime system
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Add new runtime flag :rts-flag:`--optimistic-linking` which instructs the
  runtime linker to continue in the presence of unknown symbols. By default this
  flag is not passed, preserving previous behavior.

Cmm
~~~

``base`` library
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``ghc-prim`` library
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``ghc`` library
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``ghc-heap`` library
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* The functions `getClosureInfoTbl_maybe`, `getClosureInfoTbl`,
  `getClosurePtrArgs` and `getClosurePtrArgs_maybe` have been added to allow
  reading of the relevant Closure attributes without reliance on incomplete
  selectors.

``ghc-experimental`` library
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- ``ghc-experimental`` now exposes ``GHC.RTS.Flags`` and ``GHC.Stats`` as
  ``GHC.RTS.Flags.Experimental`` and ``GHC.Stats.Experimental``. These are
  *also* exposed in ``base``, however the ``base`` versions will be deprecated as
  part of the split base project. See `CLC proposal 289
  <https://github.com/haskell/core-libraries-committee/issues/289>`__.
  Downstream consumers of these flags are encouraged to migrate to the
  ``ghc-experimental`` versions.



``template-haskell`` library
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Included libraries
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The package database provided with this distribution also contains a number of
packages other than GHC itself. See the changelogs provided with these packages
for further change information.

.. ghc-package-list::

    libraries/array/array.cabal:                         Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/base/base.cabal:                           Core library
    libraries/binary/binary.cabal:                       Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/bytestring/bytestring.cabal:               Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/Cabal/Cabal/Cabal.cabal:                   Dependency of ``ghc-pkg`` utility
    libraries/Cabal/Cabal-syntax/Cabal-syntax.cabal:     Dependency of ``ghc-pkg`` utility
    libraries/containers/containers/containers.cabal:    Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/deepseq/deepseq.cabal:                     Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/directory/directory.cabal:                 Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/exceptions/exceptions.cabal:               Dependency of ``ghc`` and ``haskeline`` library
    libraries/filepath/filepath.cabal:                   Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    compiler/ghc.cabal:                                  The compiler itself
    libraries/ghci/ghci.cabal:                           The REPL interface
    libraries/ghc-boot/ghc-boot.cabal:                   Internal compiler library
    libraries/ghc-boot-th/ghc-boot-th.cabal:             Internal compiler library
    libraries/ghc-compact/ghc-compact.cabal:             Core library
    libraries/ghc-heap/ghc-heap.cabal:                   GHC heap-walking library
    libraries/ghc-prim/ghc-prim.cabal:                   Core library
    utils/haddock/haddock-api/haddock-api.cabal:         Dependency of ``haddock`` executable
    utils/haddock/haddock-library/haddock-library.cabal: Dependency of ``haddock`` executable
    libraries/haskeline/haskeline.cabal:                 Dependency of ``ghci`` executable
    libraries/hpc/hpc.cabal:                             Dependency of ``hpc`` executable
    libraries/integer-gmp/integer-gmp.cabal:             Core library
    libraries/mtl/mtl.cabal:                             Dependency of ``Cabal`` library
    libraries/parsec/parsec.cabal:                       Dependency of ``Cabal`` library
    libraries/pretty/pretty.cabal:                       Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/process/process.cabal:                     Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/stm/stm.cabal:                             Dependency of ``haskeline`` library
    libraries/template-haskell/template-haskell.cabal:   Core library
    libraries/terminfo/terminfo.cabal:                   Dependency of ``haskeline`` library
    libraries/text/text.cabal:                           Dependency of ``Cabal`` library
    libraries/time/time.cabal:                           Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/transformers/transformers.cabal:           Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/unix/unix.cabal:                           Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/Win32/Win32.cabal:                         Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/xhtml/xhtml.cabal:                         Dependency of ``haddock`` executable
    libraries/os-string/os-string.cabal:                 Dependency of ``filepath`` library
    libraries/file-io/file-io.cabal:                     Dependency of ``directory`` library

Commit message:

Allow multiline strings in JS FFI (#25633)

docs/users_guide/9.14.1-notes.rst, after:

.. _release-9-14-1:

Version 9.14.1
==============

The significant changes to the various parts of the compiler are listed in the
following sections. See the `migration guide
<https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/wikis/migration/9.14>`_ on the GHC Wiki
for specific guidance on migrating programs to this release.

Language
~~~~~~~~

* ``-Wincomplete-record-selectors`` is now part of `-Wall`, as specified
  by `GHC Proposal 516: add warning for incomplete record selectors <https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/blob/master/proposals/0516-incomplete-record-selectors.rst>`_.
  Hence, if a library is compiled with ``-Werror``, compilation may now fail. Solution: fix the library.
  Workaround: add ``-Werror=no-incomplete-record-selectors``.

  Note that this warning is at least
  as serious as a warning about missing patterns from a function definition, perhaps even
  more so, since it is invisible in the source program.

* The combination of :extension:`ScopedTypeVariables` and :extension:`TypeApplications`
  no longer enables type applications in patterns, which now always requires
  :extension:`TypeAbstractions`. The warning flag``deprecated-type-abstractions``
  has also been removed from the compiler.

* :extension:`OverloadedRecordUpdate` now passes the arguments to a ``setField`` function
  in the flipped order, as specified by `GHC Proposal 583: HasField redesign <https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/blob/master/proposals/0583-hasfield-redesign.rst>`_.

  Previously GHC expected ``setField`` to have this type: ::

    setField :: forall (fld :: Symbol) a r. r -> a -> r

  And that's what GHC expects now: ::

    setField :: forall (fld :: Symbol) a r. a -> r -> r

  That will break the combination of :extension:`OverloadedRecordUpdate` with :extension:`RebindableSyntax`.

* Multiline strings are now accepted in foreign imports. (#25157)

Compiler
~~~~~~~~

- An improved error message is introduced to refer users to the heap-controlling flags of the RTS when there is a heap overflow during compilation. (#25198)

GHCi
~~~~

- :ghci-cmd:`:info` now outputs type declarations with @-binders that are
  considered semantically significant. See the documentation for :ghci-cmd:`:info`
  itself for a more detailed explanation.

Runtime system
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Add new runtime flag :rts-flag:`--optimistic-linking` which instructs the
  runtime linker to continue in the presence of unknown symbols. By default this
  flag is not passed, preserving previous behavior.

Cmm
~~~

``base`` library
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``ghc-prim`` library
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``ghc`` library
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``ghc-heap`` library
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* The functions `getClosureInfoTbl_maybe`, `getClosureInfoTbl`,
  `getClosurePtrArgs` and `getClosurePtrArgs_maybe` have been added to allow
  reading of the relevant Closure attributes without reliance on incomplete
  selectors.

``ghc-experimental`` library
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- ``ghc-experimental`` now exposes ``GHC.RTS.Flags`` and ``GHC.Stats`` as
  ``GHC.RTS.Flags.Experimental`` and ``GHC.Stats.Experimental``. These are
  *also* exposed in ``base``, however the ``base`` versions will be deprecated as
  part of the split base project. See `CLC proposal 289
  <https://github.com/haskell/core-libraries-committee/issues/289>`__.
  Downstream consumers of these flags are encouraged to migrate to the
  ``ghc-experimental`` versions.



``template-haskell`` library
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Included libraries
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The package database provided with this distribution also contains a number of
packages other than GHC itself. See the changelogs provided with these packages
for further change information.

.. ghc-package-list::

    libraries/array/array.cabal:                         Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/base/base.cabal:                           Core library
    libraries/binary/binary.cabal:                       Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/bytestring/bytestring.cabal:               Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/Cabal/Cabal/Cabal.cabal:                   Dependency of ``ghc-pkg`` utility
    libraries/Cabal/Cabal-syntax/Cabal-syntax.cabal:     Dependency of ``ghc-pkg`` utility
    libraries/containers/containers/containers.cabal:    Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/deepseq/deepseq.cabal:                     Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/directory/directory.cabal:                 Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/exceptions/exceptions.cabal:               Dependency of ``ghc`` and ``haskeline`` library
    libraries/filepath/filepath.cabal:                   Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    compiler/ghc.cabal:                                  The compiler itself
    libraries/ghci/ghci.cabal:                           The REPL interface
    libraries/ghc-boot/ghc-boot.cabal:                   Internal compiler library
    libraries/ghc-boot-th/ghc-boot-th.cabal:             Internal compiler library
    libraries/ghc-compact/ghc-compact.cabal:             Core library
    libraries/ghc-heap/ghc-heap.cabal:                   GHC heap-walking library
    libraries/ghc-prim/ghc-prim.cabal:                   Core library
    utils/haddock/haddock-api/haddock-api.cabal:         Dependency of ``haddock`` executable
    utils/haddock/haddock-library/haddock-library.cabal: Dependency of ``haddock`` executable
    libraries/haskeline/haskeline.cabal:                 Dependency of ``ghci`` executable
    libraries/hpc/hpc.cabal:                             Dependency of ``hpc`` executable
    libraries/integer-gmp/integer-gmp.cabal:             Core library
    libraries/mtl/mtl.cabal:                             Dependency of ``Cabal`` library
    libraries/parsec/parsec.cabal:                       Dependency of ``Cabal`` library
    libraries/pretty/pretty.cabal:                       Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/process/process.cabal:                     Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/stm/stm.cabal:                             Dependency of ``haskeline`` library
    libraries/template-haskell/template-haskell.cabal:   Core library
    libraries/terminfo/terminfo.cabal:                   Dependency of ``haskeline`` library
    libraries/text/text.cabal:                           Dependency of ``Cabal`` library
    libraries/time/time.cabal:                           Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/transformers/transformers.cabal:           Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/unix/unix.cabal:                           Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/Win32/Win32.cabal:                         Dependency of ``ghc`` library
    libraries/xhtml/xhtml.cabal:                         Dependency of ``haddock`` executable
    libraries/os-string/os-string.cabal:                 Dependency of ``filepath`` library
    libraries/file-io/file-io.cabal:                     Dependency of ``directory`` library
