utils/haddock/doc/cheatsheet/haddocks.md, before:

# Code Sections

```
  -- * Section
  -- ** Sub-section
  -- *** Sub-sub-section
  -- et cetera
```

# Named Documentation Chunks

```
  -- $name
[...]
  -- $name
  -- Here is the documentation text
  -- which is embedded elsewhere
```

# Code Blocks

```
With internal markup:
  -- @
  --   fact n = product [1..n]
  -- @
With literal text:
  -- > fact n = product [1..n]
```

# REPL Examples

```
  -- >>> fact 5
  -- 120
```

# Properties

```
  -- prop> a + b = b + a
```

# Hyperlinked Identifiers

```
  -- The value 'x' of type 'T'
  -- The out-of-scope 'MyModule.x'
  -- The "MyModule" module
```

# Textual Markup

```
  -- Emphasis: /forward slashes/.
  -- Bolding: __underscores__.
  -- Monospaced text: @ampersands@.
```

# Links and Images

```
  -- A raw link <http://example.com>
  -- [a link](http://example.com)
  -- ![description](imagepath.png)
```

# Lists

```
itemized with "*" or "-"
  -- * first item
  -- * second item
numbered with "(n)" or "n."
  -- 1. first item
  -- 2. second item
definitions with "[thing]"
  -- [one] first item
  -- [two] second item
```

# Mathematics/LaTeX

```
  -- \[
  --   f(n) = \Sum_{i=1}^{n} i
  -- \]
  -- when \(n > 0\)
```

# Headings in Documentation

```
  -- = Heading
  -- == Sub-heading
  -- === Sub-sub-heading
```

# Metadata

```
  -- @since 1.2.3
```

# Module Attributes

```
{-# OPTIONS_HADDOCK hide #-}
  Omit this module from the docs
{-# OPTIONS_HADDOCK prune #-}
  Omit definitions without docs
{-# OPTIONS_HADDOCK not-home #-}
  Do not treat this module as the
  "home" of identifiers it exports
{-# OPTIONS_HADDOCK show-extensions #-}
  Show all enabled LANGUAGE extensions
{-# OPTIONS_HADDOCK print-explicit-runtime-reps #-}
  Show all `RuntimeRep` type variables
```

# Grid tables

```
+------------------------+------------+----------+----------+
| Header row, column 1   | Header 2   | Header 3 | Header 4 |
| (header rows optional) |            |          |          |
+========================+============+==========+==========+
| body row 1, column 1   | column 2   | column 3 | column 4 |
+------------------------+------------+----------+----------+
| body row 2             | Cells may span columns.          |
+------------------------+------------+---------------------+
| body row 3             | Cells may  | \[                  |
+------------------------+ span rows. | f(n) = \sum_{i=1}   |
| body row 4             |            | \]                  |
+------------------------+------------+---------------------+
```

Commit message:

haddock: Add redact-type-synonyms pragma
`{-# OPTIONS_HADDOCK redact-type-synonyms #-}` pragma will hide the RHS
of type synonyms, and display the result kind instead, if the RHS
contains any unexported types.

utils/haddock/doc/cheatsheet/haddocks.md, after:

# Code Sections

```
  -- * Section
  -- ** Sub-section
  -- *** Sub-sub-section
  -- et cetera
```

# Named Documentation Chunks

```
  -- $name
[...]
  -- $name
  -- Here is the documentation text
  -- which is embedded elsewhere
```

# Code Blocks

```
With internal markup:
  -- @
  --   fact n = product [1..n]
  -- @
With literal text:
  -- > fact n = product [1..n]
```

# REPL Examples

```
  -- >>> fact 5
  -- 120
```

# Properties

```
  -- prop> a + b = b + a
```

# Hyperlinked Identifiers

```
  -- The value 'x' of type 'T'
  -- The out-of-scope 'MyModule.x'
  -- The "MyModule" module
```

# Textual Markup

```
  -- Emphasis: /forward slashes/.
  -- Bolding: __underscores__.
  -- Monospaced text: @ampersands@.
```

# Links and Images

```
  -- A raw link <http://example.com>
  -- [a link](http://example.com)
  -- ![description](imagepath.png)
```

# Lists

```
itemized with "*" or "-"
  -- * first item
  -- * second item
numbered with "(n)" or "n."
  -- 1. first item
  -- 2. second item
definitions with "[thing]"
  -- [one] first item
  -- [two] second item
```

# Mathematics/LaTeX

```
  -- \[
  --   f(n) = \Sum_{i=1}^{n} i
  -- \]
  -- when \(n > 0\)
```

# Headings in Documentation

```
  -- = Heading
  -- == Sub-heading
  -- === Sub-sub-heading
```

# Metadata

```
  -- @since 1.2.3
```

# Module Attributes

```
{-# OPTIONS_HADDOCK hide #-}
  Omit this module from the docs
{-# OPTIONS_HADDOCK prune #-}
  Omit definitions without docs
{-# OPTIONS_HADDOCK not-home #-}
  Do not treat this module as the
  "home" of identifiers it exports
{-# OPTIONS_HADDOCK show-extensions #-}
  Show all enabled LANGUAGE extensions
{-# OPTIONS_HADDOCK print-explicit-runtime-reps #-}
  Show all `RuntimeRep` type variables
{-# OPTIONS_HADDOCK redact-type-synonyms #-}
  Hide the RHS of type synonyms that use unexported types
```

# Grid tables

```
+------------------------+------------+----------+----------+
| Header row, column 1   | Header 2   | Header 3 | Header 4 |
| (header rows optional) |            |          |          |
+========================+============+==========+==========+
| body row 1, column 1   | column 2   | column 3 | column 4 |
+------------------------+------------+----------+----------+
| body row 2             | Cells may span columns.          |
+------------------------+------------+---------------------+
| body row 3             | Cells may  | \[                  |
+------------------------+ span rows. | f(n) = \sum_{i=1}   |
| body row 4             |            | \]                  |
+------------------------+------------+---------------------+
```
